Exponentiation Tradeoffs
========================
In [Power of Exponentiation](power-of-exponentiation.md) I discussed the notion of exponential vs linear trades. Here I'll add some caveats.

Exponential trades are great for their ability to amass resources, but they're only worthwhile if you break even with your initial investment. When uncertainty threatens your returns, exponential trades should be viewed with suspicion. Take [the previous post's example](power-of-exponentiation.md) of training your dog to fetch the newspaper: we guesstimated it would take 24 hours to train your dog to fetch (4 minutes per day for one year), which means your dog needs to fetch the newspaper on its own for a full year after training just to break even on the time you invested. If your dog isn't likely to live for another year, better to get the newspaper yourself!

Uncertainty of returns can also affect whether you'll recoup your initial investment. In the dog scenario, we have high conviction that a newspaper will arrive each day and, once trained, your canine will retrieve it. This makes calculating the time you save easy: `time_taken_to_retrieve_newspaper` x `number_of_days_newspaper_arrives` over the dog's lifespan. But what if your golden retriever is prone to sickness or laziness and won't always fetch the newspaper, even after training? Your returns become less certain as you try to guess what proportion of days your dog will actually return the newspaper: `time_taken_to_retrieve_newspaper` x ( `proportion_of_days_dog_fetches` x `number_of_days_newspaper_arrives` ). You might still be net positive on time saved in the long run, but you might not - Cesar Millan wouldn't have a business if predicting dog behaviour was easy.

These equations reveal a fundamental truth about exponential trades: `gross_payout = magnitude_of_payout x number_of_payouts`. In our example, the "payout" was time saved, the magnitude of the payout was 4 minutes, and the number of payouts = 365 days x 7 years for a well-trained dog and something less for a lazy dog. But let's not forget that we had to invest some time to train the dog! Subtracting our initial investment yields the final equation: `net_payout = (magnitude_of_payout x number_of_payouts) - initial_investment`. If your initial investment is higher than the gross payout, you should run from that particular exponential trade because your net payout will be negative. This highlights a trap that optimization-minded folks can fall into: inefficiency can be frustrating, but blindly cleaning up _all_ inefficiency is counterproductive because the gross payout isn't always worth the initial investment!

Of note: make sure to consider auxiliary pros and cons when weighing a particular exponential trade. The train-your-dog case is not simply "time invested" vs "time returned" - if you're an outdoors-minded person, you might love walking outside every morning (disincentivizing you from training your dog); if you enjoy spending time with animals, the dog training might be fun per se (perhaps tipping the balance towards dog-training even if your net time payout is negative). Keep your wants and priorities in mind when considering these tradeoffs; they will help you make the ultimate decision.
